Add new parameter prior distributions (#595)
PEtab-dev/PEtab: doc/v2/documentation_data_format.rst

  priors are outside the definition of the parameter estimation problem
  and were a source of confusion.
* ``objectivePriorType`` and ``objectivePriorParameters`` in the
  :ref:`v2_parameters_table` are renamed to ``priorDistribution`` and
  ``priorParameters``, respectively. This change was made to simplify
  the PEtab format.
* The admissible values for ``estimate`` in the :ref:`v2_parameters_table`
  are now ``true`` and ``false`` instead of ``1`` and ``0``.

> * Support for new ``priorDistribution`` distributions in the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support for new parameter prior distributions in the 
```

Maybe clearer, since ``priorDistribution`` didn't exist before.

  the PEtab format.
* The admissible values for ``estimate`` in the :ref:`v2_parameters_table`
  are now ``true`` and ``false`` instead of ``1`` and ``0``.

> * Support for new ``prior`` distributions,  as well as support for 
>   truncated distributions in the :ref:`v2_parameters_table`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support for new ``prior`` distributions in the :ref:`v2_parameters_table`, and clarification that bounds truncate the prior distributions.
```

- ``initializationPriorType`` [STRING, OPTIONAL]

  Prior types used for sampling initial points for estimation. If the prior is
  not truncated (see ``initializationPriorParameters``), sampled points are

>   clipped to lie within the parameter boundaries specified by ``lowerBound``

Author: I would be happy to avoid having the sampled points clipped, as I agree this is a bit weird and can for users lead to unexpected behavior. Furthermore, with truncated bounds can now be enforced in a more logical way.

  and ``upperBound``. Otherwise, points are sampled directly from the truncated
  distribution. The default is ``parameterScaleUniform``.

  Possible prior types are (for mathematical definition see below):

>     - *cauchy*, Cauchy prior on linear parameters

Reviewer 2: Use consistent separation characters: sometimes ",", sometimes ":"

Author: Thanks for noticing!

    - *chisquare*, Chisquare prior on linear parameters
    - *exponential*, Exponential prior on linear parameters
    - *gamma*, Gamma prior on linear parameters
    - *laplace*: Laplace prior on linear parameters
    - *logNormal*: exponentiated Gaussian prior on linear parameters
    - *normal*: Gaussian prior on linear parameters
    - *rayleigh*, Rayleigh prior on linear parameters

>     - *uniform*: Flat prior on linear parameters

Reviewer 2: As I understand things *uniform** is the default if nothing is provided. If yes, please add the `(default)` to uniform. If not ignore this comment

Author: It is the `parameterScaleUniform` which is default (should already be stated).

>     - *parameterScaleCauchy*, Cauchy prior on original parameter scale

Reviewer 2: I would add the `parameter*` to a new list and start it with something like:
Supported `parameterScales` are: 
- *parameterScaleLaplace*: Laplace prior on original parameter scale
...

      scale (equivalent to "no prior")

- ``initializationPriorParameters`` [STRING, OPTIONAL]

  Prior parameters used for sampling of initial points for estimation,
  separated by a semicolon. Defaults to ``lowerBound;upperBound``.
  The parameters are expected to be in linear scale except for the
  ``parameterScale`` priors, where the prior parameters are expected to be
  in parameter scale (e.g. `log10` scale if a parameter has ``parameterScale``
  `log10`).

  Optionally, a *truncated* distribution can be specified for any distribution
  except the uniform distributions by providing a lower and upper bound after
  the prior parameters. For example, a truncated normal distribution would be
  defined with parameters ``mean;std;lb;ub``, where ``lb`` and ``ub`` are the
  lower and upper bounds, respectively. For a truncated distribution, both the
  lower and upper bounds must be provided.

  So far, only numeric values are supported, no parameter names. Parameters for
  the different prior types are:

    - *cauchy*, location; scale
    - *chisquare*, degrees of freedom
    - *exponential*, rate
    - *gamma*, shape; scale
    - *laplace*: location; scale

>     - *logNormal*: parameters of corresp. normal distribution (see: normal)

Reviewer 2: use consistent separators, i.e. `,` or `:`

  Prior types used for sampling of initial points for estimation. Sampled
  points are clipped to lie inside the parameter boundaries specified by
  ``lowerBound`` and ``upperBound``. Defaults to ``parameterScaleUniform``.
  Prior types used for sampling initial points for estimation. If the prior is
  not truncated (see ``initializationPriorParameters``), sampled points are
  clipped to lie within the parameter boundaries specified by ``lowerBound``
  and ``upperBound``. Otherwise, points are sampled directly from the truncated
  distribution. The default is ``parameterScaleUniform``.

  Possible prior types are:
  Possible prior types on linear parameter scale are (for mathematical 
  definition see below):

    - *uniform*: flat prior on linear parameters
    - *normal*: Gaussian prior on linear parameters
    - *cauchy*: Cauchy prior on linear parameters
    - *chisquare*: Chisquare prior on linear parameters
    - *exponential*: Exponential prior on linear parameters
    - *gamma*: Gamma prior on linear parameters
    - *laplace*: Laplace prior on linear parameters
    - *logNormal*: exponentiated Gaussian prior on linear parameters

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Author: Thanks for the feedback.

I agree that objective priors should also be unbounded (unless a truncated prior is explicitly used). We can briefly discuss and reach a conclusion on this at the next editor meeting.

As for log-priors, I would opt for only supporting log-normal as it is quite a common distribution, and it appears sometimes in biology, e.g. it has been argued that for example protein distributions follow a log-normal. Moreover, most distribution packages support log-normal (and its truncated variant). The other log distributions I would drop, and suggest in the spec that one can parameterize the model if one for example needs a log-laplace. I will also raise this on the next editor meeting.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Reviewer: Since we want to support lossless petab v1->v2 conversion, we probably need to include the previous log/log10 versions for normal/laplace in some way.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Author: There is no `log10` version of the normal and Laplace priors in PEtab v1.

However, v1 -> v2 is a fair point. Then we should keep the log-laplace prior, and I will add it and its pdf to the documentation.

Should be noted that the tricky part with the log-laplce is that it does not appear in all distribution packages. But, since the Laplace distribution is standard in most libraries, generating samples from it should still be quite straightforward.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Author: > There is, with parameterScale=log10 and objectivePriorType=laplace, isn't it?

This will be relevant to fix if decide to drop the `parameterScale` column in the parameter table.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Reviewer: > if decide to drop the `parameterScale` column in the parameter table.

Shall we address that first then?

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Reviewer: At least on the editor side. I think we will have a final vote on the complete PEtab v2 in the end.

I think it might be better to remove it first from the current v2 draft, and stay focused on the actual prior changes here. (The experiments pull request took us almost a year... smaller bites might be faster).

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Author: I agree, I will just focus on the priors here and not do any other changes to the parameter table. FYI, I am currently waiting for the next editor meeting first to see what is decided regarding the naming of the prior column, and whether we should remove the `initializationPrior`.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Author: > Let's create a PR for that as basis for the discussion?

So first we merge this with `initializationPrior`, `objectivePrior` and `parmeterScale` priors, then we create a separate PR with removing `initializationPrior` and renaming `objectivePrior`? If that is the case, sounds good for me to partition into smaller (hopefully easier to merge) PRs.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Reviewer: I'd go the other way around: 

1a. drop parameter scale (also removes some of the prior options)
1b. drop intialization prior, rename objective prior
2. update what's left of the parameter priors, then we don't need to worry about initializationPrior and the interaction with parameter scale anymore in here 

1a/b can be done in parallel.

Either is fine though.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Author: This makes more sense, and I agree we should do it this way.

>     - *logLaplace*: exponentiated Laplace prior on linear parameters

Reviewer 2: Please make this changes so we get rid of unnecessary things (we agreed on that in the last meeting and email discussion):
> 1a. drop parameter scale (also removes some of the prior options) (EDIT: https://github.com/PEtab-dev/PEtab/pull/611)
> 1b. drop intialization prior, rename objective prior

Then it is much easier to get the formulations right for the rest.

  Prior parameters used for the objective function during estimation.
  For more detailed documentation, see ``initializationPriorParameters``.
  As for initialization priors, truncated priors are allowed.

Prior distributions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> For ``initializationPriorParameters`` and ``objectivePriorType`` several

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For ``initializationPriorType`` and ``objectivePriorType`` several
```

or did you mean `*PriorParameters` for both? In any case, I guess one needs to be changed.

distributions are supported (see above). Denote the parameter value by :math:`x`
and the Gamma function by :math:`\Gamma`; then, the following parameterizations
are used for the supported priors:

> - *cauchy*:
>   - parameters: (location, scale) = :math:`(\mu, \sigma)`

Reviewer 3: The formatting is off (currently these two lines are rendered as one line). Maybe a newline helps.
https://petab--595.org.readthedocs.build/en/595/v2/documentation_data_format.html#prior-distributions
```suggestion
- *cauchy*:

  - parameters: (location, scale) = :math:`(\mu, \sigma)`
```

Author: It worked when I compiled locally to a pdf, but alas. I think a newline with help, and will add it for all distributions.

.. _v2_prior_distributions:

Prior distributions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let :math:`x` denote the parameter value and :math:`\Gamma` the Gamma function,
then the following prior distributions are supported:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 10 15 20 5

  * - ``priorDistribution``
    - ``priorParameters``
    - PDF
    - Domain
  * - cauchy
    - location (:math:`\mu`); scale (:math:`\sigma`)
    - .. math::
        \pi(x|\mu, \sigma) = \frac{1}{\pi \sigma \left( 1 + \left(\frac{x - \mu}{\sigma} \right)^2\right)}
    - :math:`(-\infty, \infty)`

  * - chisquare
    - degrees of freedom (:math:`\nu`)
    - .. math::
        \pi(x|\nu) = \frac{x^{\nu/2-1}e^{-x/2}}{2^{\nu/2}\Gamma(\nu/2)}
    - :math:`(0, \infty)`

  * - exponential
    - scale (:math:`\theta`)
    - .. math::
        \pi(x|\theta) = \frac{1}{\theta}e^{-x/\theta}
    - :math:`(0, \infty)`

  * - gamma
    - shape (:math:`\alpha`); scale (:math:`\theta`)
    - .. math::
        \pi(x|\alpha, \theta) = \frac{x^{\alpha - 1}e^{-x/\theta}}{\Gamma(\alpha)\theta^{\alpha}}
    - :math:`(-\infty, \infty)`

  * - laplace
    - location (:math:`\mu`); scale (:math:`\sigma`)
    - .. math::

>         \pi(x|\mu, \sigma) = \frac{1}{2\sigma}\exp\left(- \frac{|x - \mu |}{\sigma}\right) \quad x \in (-\infty, \infty)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        \pi(x|\mu, \sigma) = \frac{1}{2\sigma}\exp\left(- \frac{|x - \mu |}{\sigma}\right)
```

Author: Thanks, missed this :)

  estimated (``true``) or set to a fixed value (``false``)
  (see ``nominalValue``).

- ``priorDistribution`` [STRING, OPTIONAL]

  Prior types used for the 
  :ref:`MAP objective function and for Bayesian inference <v2_objective_function>`.
  It is valid to have no priors. However, if priors are specified for a subset
  of parameters, this defaults to the ``uniform`` prior (with ``priorParameters``
  set to ``lowerBound;upperBound``) for the other parameters.

  Prior distributions are truncated by the ``lowerBound`` and ``upperBound`` if 
  the prior's domain exceeds the parameter bounds. A non-truncated prior can 
  be created by setting the parameter bounds to  match the prior's domain 
  (e.g., ``0`` and ``inf`` for ``logNormal``).

  Possible prior types are (mathematical definition below):

    - *cauchy*: Cauchy prior
    - *chisquare*: Chisquare prior
    - *exponential*: Exponential prior
    - *gamma*: Gamma prior
    - *laplace*: Laplace prior
    - *log10Normal*: Log10-normal prior
    - *logLaplace*: Log-Laplace prior

>     - *logNormal*: Log-normal prior

Reviewer: :+1: let's use `log-*`

>     - *logNormal*: Log-normal prior

Reviewer: > Usually just log-normal or lognormal (i.e., one word, not two words rewritten in camel case).

I changed it to `log-normal` etc..

    - *logUniform*: Log-uniform prior
    - *normal*: Normal prior
    - *rayleigh*, Rayleigh prior
    - *uniform*: Flat (uniform) prior

- ``priorParameters`` [STRING, OPTIONAL]

  Prior parameters used for the 
  :ref:`MAP objective function and for Bayesian inference <v2_objective_function>`.
  ``priorParameters`` is required if ``priorDistribution`` is non-empty.

  Only numeric values are supported, no parameter names.
  Parameters for the different prior types are:

  - *cauchy*: location; scale
  - *chisquare*: degrees of freedom

>   - *exponential*: rate

Author: I like this suggestion, as it would remove repeating lists. I think I do not want to include the log-variant columns, as I want to explicitly provide the formula for all distributions (this is helpful for tool developers, in cases they cannot rely on a Distribution package containing a distribution, e.g. LogLaplace is available in Julia yet)

>   - *exponential*: rate

Reviewer 3: Yes, probably easier to read if the log- variants are separate rows...

>   - *exponential*: rate

Reviewer: @dilpath added `doc/src/update_tables.py` a while ago to convert tsv tables to rst. This might be handy here. There are some examples in this file already (`START TABLE` ...).

  - *gamma*: shape; scale
  - *laplace*: location; scale
  - *log10Normal*: parameters of corresponding normal distribution (see normal)
  - *logLaplace*: parameters of corresponding Laplace distribution (see laplace)
  - *logNormal*: parameters of corresponding normal distribution (see normal)
  - *logUniform*: parameters of corresponding uniform distribution (see uniform)
  - *normal*: mean; standard deviation (**not** variance)
  - *rayleigh*: scale

>   - *uniform*: lower bound; upper bound

Reviewer 4: do we really need extra lower/upper bounds? shouldn't that be implied by parameter bounds?

Author: This is a good, but also tricky point. You are correct the lower- and upper parameter bounds do imply the bounds. However, I think for consistency that we should for all priors enforce that parameters are specified. I am open for discussing this though.

> Prior distributions

Author: Yes, as commented above I think I will add the table instead

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For ``priorDistribution`` several distributions are supported (see above). Denote the parameter
value by :math:`x` and the Gamma function by :math:`\Gamma`; then, the
following parameterizations are used:

> - *cauchy*:

Reviewer: (no) commas separating the domain are inconsistent

Author: Thanks for noticing, will fix!

  - parameters: (location, scale) = :math:`(\mu, \sigma)`

  .. math::
     \pi(x|\mu, \sigma) = \frac{1}{\pi \sigma \left( 1 + \left(\frac{x - \mu}{\sigma} \right)^2\right)} \quad x \in (-\infty, \infty)

- *chisquare*:

>   - parameter: degree of freedom = :math:`\nu`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - parameter: degrees of freedom = :math:`\nu`
```

- ``prior`` [STRING, OPTIONAL]

  Prior types used for the 
  :ref:`MAP objective function and for Bayesian inference <v2_objective_function>`.
  It is valid to have no priors. However, if priors are specified for a subset
  of parameters, this defaults to the ``uniform`` prior (with ``priorParameters``
  set to ``lowerBound;upperBound``) for the other parameters.

>   Prior distributions are truncated by the ``lowerBound`` and ``upperBound`` if 

Reviewer: Do we need to clarify truncation here or is it unambiguous?

Author: I think it is good to clarify here, so that users easily can identify what to expect when doing, for example, Bayesian inference (and what they need to do if they want unbounded priors)

Author: Ahh, you mean also add a link for extra clarification? (I think that would be nice)

>   the prior's domain is outside the parameter bounds. A non-truncated prior can 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the prior's domain exceeds the parameter bounds. A non-truncated prior can 
```

  be created by setting the parameter bounds to  match the prior's domain 
  (e.g., ``0`` and ``inf`` for ``logNormal``).

  Possible prior types are (mathematical definition below):

    - *cauchy*: Cauchy prior
    - *chisquare*: Chisquare prior
    - *exponential*: Exponential prior
    - *gamma*: Gamma prior
    - *laplace*: Laplace prior
    - *log10Normal*: Log10-normal prior
    - *logLaplace*: Log-Laplace prior
    - *logNormal*: Log-normal prior
    - *logUniform*: Log-uniform prior
    - *normal*: Normal prior
    - *rayleigh*, Rayleigh prior
    - *uniform*: Flat (uniform) prior

- ``priorParameters`` [STRING, OPTIONAL]

  Prior parameters used for the 
  :ref:`MAP objective function and for Bayesian inference <v2_objective_function>`.

>   ``priorParameters`` is required if ``prior`` is non-empty.

Reviewer: For `uniform` we could allow empty parameters instead of repeating the bounds?

>   So far, only numeric values are supported, no parameter names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Only numeric values are supported, no parameter names.
```

    - *normal*: Gaussian prior on linear parameters
    - *rayleigh*, Rayleigh prior on linear parameters
    - *uniform*: Flat prior on linear parameters

  Supported priors on the scale defined via ``parameterScale`` are:

    - *parameterScaleCauchy*: Cauchy prior on original parameter scale
    - *parameterScaleLaplace*: Laplace prior on original parameter scale
    - *parameterScaleNormal*: Gaussian prior on original parameter scale
    - *parameterScaleUniform*: (default): Flat prior on original parameter
      scale (equivalent to "no prior")

- ``initializationPriorParameters`` [STRING, OPTIONAL]

  Prior parameters used for sampling of initial points for estimation,
  separated by a semicolon. Defaults to ``lowerBound;upperBound``.
  The parameters are expected to be in linear scale except for the
  ``parameterScale`` priors, where the prior parameters are expected to be
  in parameter scale (e.g. `log10` scale if a parameter has ``parameterScale``
  `log10`).

  Optionally, a *truncated* distribution can be specified for any distribution
  except the uniform distributions by providing a lower and upper bound after

>   the prior parameters. For example, a truncated normal distribution would be

Reviewer: After dropping `initializationPrior*` (#612), and if we say that the bounds truncate the prior, is there still a need for truncated prior distributions? Not really, right?

Author: Fair point. But then I will make it clear in the documentation that the bounds are truncation points for priors
